---
title: "Ten Thousand Worlds: Ships"
date: 2021-01-29
thumbnail: "campaigns/ten_thousand_worlds/ships.png"
categories: ["Role Playing Games"]
tags: ["Cypher System", "Monte Cook Games", "Ten Thousand Worlds"]
draft: true
---

_The Ten Thousand Worlds is a (work-in-progress) futuristic science fantasy setting. If you want to get a feel for life in the Worlds, think Firefly, a bit of Guardians of the Galaxy, some Doctor Who and Farscape and a fair bit of The Expanse._

## Space Travel

## Direct Course

### Transfer Orbits

In orbital mechanics a transfer orbit is an intermediate elliptical orbit that is used to move a satellite or other object from one circular, or largely circular, orbit to another. There are several types of transfer orbits, which vary in their energy efficiency and speed of transfer.

* **Hohmann transfer orbit**, an elliptical orbit used to transfer a spacecraft between two circular orbits of different altitudes in the same plane. Within the worlds, this almost always means traveling from one colony or world in orbit around the binary pair to another. Because of the highly fuel-efficient fusion drives used in the Worlds this is the most common type of transfer.
* **Bi-elliptic transfer**, a slower method of transfer, but one that may be more efficient than a Hohmann transfer orbit. 
* **Geostationary transfer orbit or geosynchronous transfer orbit** is usually also a Hohmann transfer orbit. Specifically though, this requires the spacecraft to be stationary above a fixed point on a planet, so the only place this applies is when orbiting Worlds with a significant gravitational mass.

### Delta-V

Probably the most important concept in all of space travel is that of **Delta-V** (symbolized as &#x394;V). In essence, &#x394;V is the total amount by which a spacecraft can change it's velocity with a given fuel load, or more simply the amount of "effort" a spacecraft can exert. Any trip, no matter how short or long, requires a certain amount of &#x394;V expenditure, and the amount of &#x394;V expended directly affects the time taken for the trip. A given spacecraft can expend a small amount of &#x394;V, achieve a certain velocity, and take a particular time for the trip; that same spacecraft might also choose to expend more &#x394;V to cut the trip time.

## Technology

### Fusion Drive

Central to the setting of The Ten Thousand Worlds is a dated but ubiquitous fusion-powered system that allows spacecraft to travel from one end of the Solar System to the other quickly and cheaply. It allows for fuel-efficient, extended periods of high-G acceleration that reduces intra-system trips to days or weeks. Such a propulsion system is known as a **Fusion Drive** or **Torch Drive** and features huge thrust, incredible exhaust velocity and immense power inside a small package. 

Fuel is ejected from the rear of a spacecraft using a linear accelerator and ignited with a high power laser approximately 200-300m from the ship. The resulting explosion is contained and constricted by an intense magnetic field generated by the spacecraft's drive cone, which also acts as a heat and radiation shield. Repeat this dozens of times a second and you have stable thrust, in much the same manner as an Old Earth pulse jet engine. The fuel efficiency of this system means even small spacecraft can carry enough fuel for 20-30 days of continuous thrust at 1g with occasional periods of thrust up to 6-7g or higher if necessary.

The fuel used is Deuterium (<sup>2</sup>H) and Helium-3 (<sup>3</sup>He) or Tritium (<sup>3</sup>H) pellets which can be purchased at resupply depots or produced on-board if the ship has fuel scoops and a processing plant. In the Ten Thousand Worlds, the largest natural source of Deuterium, Helium-3 and Tritium is the gas giant XXXX, but with the right kind of processing they can also be produced from mining water-ice asteroids.

But this is considered a "cruise mode" for most ships, and even higher thrust levels can be created by injecting water into the exhaust to add more mass to the fusion jet. This technique requires a separate water tank, the capacity of which limits the use of "boost mode", but makes accelerations of 12-15g or more achievable for short periods of time.

Any spacecraft will have it's fuel capacity rated in terms of total &#x394;V at Gross Weight Load (GWL) in both cruise and boost modes. Once that &#x394;V is exhausted, the ship is out of fuel and cannot maneuver; it will keep on moving along it's present trajectory until it encounters a gravitational mass strong enough to capture it (or even give it a slingshot) or it hits something large enough to destory the ship.

Any spacecraft which accelerates at greater than 3-4g has to provide some means for the crew & passengers to mitigate the effect of that acceleration. **Vylk Grav-Deck** allows accelerations of up to around 7g to be compensated for normally, along with inertial compensation for maneuvering while under drive. Higher accelerations will "bleed through" the inertial compensators, so additional measures such as gel-based acceleration couches or full immersion acceleration tanks must be fitted for acceleration in excess of 7g.

### Spacecraft Weaponry



## Advanced Technology

### Artificial Gravity

In the Worlds, there are several ways to generate artificial gravity - some easier than others.

The easiest, oldest and most practical is **Spin Gravity** - take any structure and spin it; a gravity-like inertial force is generated at right-angles to the axis of rotation. This technique can be applied to any size of structure from small spacecraft to giant stations.

## Cypher System Ships

In accordance with the vehicle rules from the **Cypher System Core Rulebook (Revised)** and the **Stars Are Fire** supplement, ships in the Worlds are defined by a series of characteristics and modifiers, as follows:

| Level | Ship Type |
| --- | ---|
| 1 | One-man work pod, light racer or fighter  |
| 2 | Short-Range Shuttle |
| 3 | Long Range Shuttle, Patrol Boat or Scout |
| 4 | Corvette, Light Freighter, Yacht |
| 5 | Destroyer, Frigate, Asteroid Miner |
| 6 | Cruiser, Cruise Liner |
| 7 | Heavy Cruiser or Freighter |
| 8 | Carrier, Battleship or Heavy Freighter |
| 9 | Heavy Carrier or Dreadnought, Gas Mining Platforms |
| 10 | Colony Ship  |
| 11-15 | Immobile structures: large asteroids, stations, Worlds and colonies  |

To further distinguish individual ships

| Modifier | Description |
| --- | --- |
| **Tech Rating** | Each ship has a Tech Rating of _Influx, Early, Contemporary_ or _Advanced_. Ships gain an easing or hindrance of task rolls for each difference in tech level between them and a target ship, to a maximum of 2 steps. |
| **Superior Weapons** | Superior Weapons (rated at 1 or 2 points) act as an asset, easing attack task rolls by up to two steps against other ships. |
| **Superior Armor** | Superior Armor provides additional passive defense against incoming weapons by easing defensive task rolls by 1 or 2 steps. |
| **Point Defense Systems** | Point Defense Systems (usually rapid-fire lasers or coilguns) provide additional last-second defensive capability but only against incoming powered projectiles (torpedoes or missiles) by acting as a 1 or 2 point asset when making defense task rolls. | 

## Design Notes

When thinking about how ships would work in the Ten Thousand Worlds, I wanted to stick to a few principles:

* **Realistic, but playable physics:** Ships would be more like those in Babylon 5 or The Expanse than Star Wars or Star Trek. With most game systems, this wouldn't make much of a difference to the way space travel is portrayed but would make the concepts of transfer orbits and &#x394;V management important, and give combat more of a "naval warfare" than "dogfighting" feel.
* **No FTL:** The entirety of Human life now exists in a single star system and it's artificial worlds. There is no "Human Empire" spanning hundreds of planets, and more importantly there's no easy way out of this system.
* **Plausible Technology:** The technology used should be plausible, but can be advanced beyond current knowledge if necessary. For ships, this means using a 